Good morning, buenos dias.
Promise that's the only Spanish so far.
They told me you don't have a Spanish service yet, so we'll keep it at that, that's all right.
My name is Lenzki and Jorans Montesarengor Landonavarros.
And the reason I do it that way is because for years as a resident here as on staff here, Pastor Tom loved for me to introduce myself that way, so you can all tell him now that I did the bit, and I introduced myself that way.
But no, it is wonderful to be back.
My name is Lenz Kijorens.
I am the pastor of Sanctuary Church on the northwest side of town, former pastoral resident.
And I am very honored to be here with you today to share the word of God.
I've been praying about what God wanted us to talk on today since Jim asked me to preach.
And I believe he's given me a word that he wants us to meditate on, to chew on, and wrestle with.
And I will do my best to communicate that as God intended.
So what I mean by that is this.
If the message today inspires you, excites you, stirs you up, then great, all glory and honor be to God.
However, if the message is a bit challenging, convicting, and it makes you feel a bit awkward, don't blame me.
I'm the messenger.
Talk to Jim or God.
And we'll do that.
So to start with today, what I want you to do is I want you to do a mental exercise with me, and I want you to think about really quick something that you really want.
I'm talking like childlike faith here, something you really want, not something you'd be okay with having, not something that you casually, every now and then think of, oh, that'd be nice, something you really want.
For some of you that may be a car, for some of you that may be a boyfriend or girlfriend, for some of you that may be, I don't know that the lions win a Super Bowl or make it to one at some point in our lifetime.
You can dream.
Now, we could come up with a bunch of stuff for that list, but let's take it, that's a bit shallow, it's a bit surface level.
What if we took it a bit deeper and I asked you what you really wanted?
What if the answer to that would be,
for your marriage to be reconciled or healthier.
What if what you really want is for financial freedom and to be freed from the weight of debt?
What if what you really wanted, what you really needed was that when you go to that next doctor appointment, there's a healthy prognosis in good news.
What if what you really need or want is a job?
or a different job.
See, that list could go pretty deep as well.
It doesn't take a lot for any of us to look at the world around us and recognize and realize that the world in which we live in is constantly wrestling with that question, constantly wrestling with looking out at the world around them and going, how do my wants, my needs and desires fit into all of this?
We're constantly, everyone around us, constantly wondering and wrestling with our wants, needs and desires.
And thankfully, and ironically, we live in a world that is more than happy to share that information with you.
There is no shortage of influencers and of podcasters and authors, of economists, of talk show hosts, of politicians, of pastors,
of that one relative at Thanksgiving.
There's no shortage of people willing and open and able to tell you exactly what to do about your needs, wants, and desires, and how to have them met.
Now, rest assured, the message today is not about me pulling off a list of all your
preferred offers, podcasters, authors, and everybody else that you listen to to help you navigate life and tell you which are right or wrong when you feel like that, heaven forbid.
I'm not doing that.
But I do want to encourage us through the word of God and as his people, as his disciples, as his talladeem to consider what God might want to say and what our approach should be as his children to addressing our own wants, needs, and desires.
So to do that, I want to start by inviting you to turn with me to Jeremiah chapter 29.
I've been told in your Pew Bible, it's page 641.
Okay?
Now we're not going to be looking at the whole chapter, but we are going to be bouncing back and forth in it and looking at it the whole service.
So you might want to just keep your finger in there or whatever and just hold on to it.
But to start with, I want to look at chapter 29, but I want to start with some verses that I'm sure will probably be very familiar.
Jeremiah 29, 11 through 13 says this.
This is the word of God.
For I know the plans I have for you, declares the Lord.
Plans to prosper you and not to harm you.
Plans to give you hope and a future.
Then you will call on me and come and pray to me and I will listen to you.
You will seek me and find me when you seek me with all your heart.
Love it.
Great.
Wouldn't that be great?
That's the word of God.
Hallelujah.
Another song.
Let's go.
That's perfect.
We love that verse.
That is one of the most frequently quoted verses in all of scripture.
You come across it all the time.
People sharing it on social media.
You see it in books, in songs, in cards.
People needle pointed into pillows and they put it in frames in their houses or whatever else they do, right?
It's a verse that's often quoted and used in significant events like weddings, anniversaries, graduations during major life milestones and changes.
It's a reassuring and hope-giving promise from our Lord and Savior.
I love it.
But what I want to talk about today, because I wish I was it, is that as much as I love it and as I much as it's one of the most frequently quoted verses in Scripture, it's also one of the
most frequently misquoted or kind of used out of context versus in scripture in all of the Bible.
See, context matters.
And it matters because if we don't consider the context of a scripture, we risk missing the point of what God was actually trying to say through it to the audience.
And we miss the opportunity of really tapping into the power that is there within the scripture, knowing
what God was trying to say in as full of sense as possible helps us understand what he's trying to tell the audience then and us now.
So I want to talk to you guys a bit about what's happening in the story here.
Jeremiah 29 or the scroll of Jeremiah was originally written to the Israelites, to the Israelites, to God's people who have been taken into captivity and exile in Babylon.
See at this point in history, Jerusalem has been attacked, sacked twice, at least they would say, and many of its inhabitants have been taken away forcibly as exiles to live and serve and work in Babylon.
So this letter is being written to a people that have experienced the ravages of war, the destruction of their homes, the loss of loved ones and friends.
to people taken forcibly out of their place.
On top of that, they've been taken forcibly and meant to live their land.
And to them, let me remind you, the land is the promised land.
The land of promise, consider this scenario.
The people of God, the people of Yahweh who were freed from Egyptian labor and
slavery and driven out, freed from that, driven into a land that they were scold was the Promised Land.
Their land, their inheritance, part of their identity are now being led out of that land in chains again, in captivity again to a foreign power.
They are living almost an exact reversal of God's promises and God's works of the Exodus.
This is
heartbreaking.
What makes it even harder is that when they examine the situation and go, why is this happening?
They have no one to blame but themselves.
The author and the story tells us this is the consequence of them turning away from God, being unfaithful, choosing unrighteousness.
This was not God's desire, but it was God's design because of their doing.
So on top of how heartbreaking and horrible this is, they have no one to blame but themselves.
This is a heartbreaking scenario.
And if that wasn't enough, I'm just wanting to give you the picture.
Wherever there might be a ray of hope, because there were other prophets, and I'm using this intentionally, they were trying to give the people another sense of hope by telling them, you know, that that's not the case.
God said that people should not listen to them because they were false because he had other plants.
See, God wants us, want it then to understand exactly what was happening and why it was happening.
So in Jeremiah 29, that's kind of the backdrop.
That's what's happening.
Okay.
We're going to go back toward the beginning more and around verse four, this section that's happening to these people that have been exiled.
This is what God says to them then.
This is what the Lord Almighty, the God of Israel, says to all those I carried into exile from Jerusalem to Babylon.
Build houses and settle down.
Plant gardens and eat what they produce.
Marry and have sons and daughters.
Find wise for your sons and give your daughters in marriage so that they too may have sons and daughters.
Increase in number there.
Do not decrease.
That's the message.
to these exiled, heartbroken, driven out of their home people.
It's not imminent rescue is on the way.
It's not fear not for the armies of God or angels are coming to save you.
It's not, don't bother unpacking your bags.
You won't be there long.
God looks at them in their trying circumstances, knowing what they want, need, and desire.
And instead says,
settle in, it's going to be a while.
Now, I didn't say it exactly like that, but you can imagine this probably how it lends.
You can imagine these people hearing this message and saying, what are you telling me?
This isn't what I want to hear.
Build houses, plant gardens, have kids and marry them off?
Pastor and author that I know pointed out that all of the things God is asking the people to do are painstakingly slow things.
Build houses, plant
Gardens have kids and then marry them.
I know people got married younger, but we're still talking years here So in the midst of their heartbreak in the midst of their struggle God is telling them settle in It's almost I said God looked at their circumstances knew their hearts desires and their their pleas and gave them the opposite of what they would want and
and when these other prophets would say, no, no, no, he's coming soon or no, we should rise up in rebellion.
We are God's people, we should reclaim our land.
Any kind of message God said, do not listen to them.
I have given you my word and I've told you to settle in.
Any other message is not from me.
So if you hear hope or you want to cling to hope because the false prophets, what they were trying to do is maintain their own positions of power by telling the people
What they want to hear?
Rare concept, right?
The telling people what they want to hear will draw the crowds to you.
I don't know why I've ever heard that.
But that's what they were trying to do.
And God is so concerned about the truth and wanting his people to know what he said.
Look, and before this happens, they're going to say this.
That's not me.
Don't listen to them.
He's challenging them with the reality.
Then an uncomfortable truth is still better than a convenient lie.
This is hard.
This is not what I want.
This is not what I desire.
This is not what I need.
So whoever sells me on the idea, these will be addressed the way I want.
That's all.
And God say, no, no, no, no.
Don't go that way.
That's what happened to Israel already in the beginning.
They were led astray.
So that's where we find ourselves as a context.
That's where the people are.
That's where they are when they're receiving this word.
Okay?
That's perfectly natural for us to go.
Okay, so then what does this have to do with me?
What does that have to do with us?
Perfectly not.
We approach the word of God to better know him and his plans and his works so that we may also know our place in the story so that he may speak to us as well.
So what I wanted you to do then, now that we know that we know or what we've been talking about, is to go back to how we started and think about your wants, your needs and your desires.
that I want you to add to that list or that equation.
Some thought about what you see in the world around you, in the news, what you hear from friends and family.
Take a moment to reflect on the health, the finances, the relationships and the life of those closest to you or those communities that you are aware of, your family, your home.
consider their wants, needs, and desires.
See, the reality is that while we may not be an exiled captive people in a foreign land, I know that for most of us, a lot of us, frequently we have a little prayer that when we are in other, we say to ourselves that it is the same prayer that the exiles were saying then, and it's the same prayer that many say around the world.
and the stillness of our heart and the depths of our soul.
We look at the world around us and we say, God fix this.
God do something.
God address this.
God change this.
We sit in doctor's offices and say, God heal this.
We sit in counseling offices and we say, God mend this.
We sit in all that is that we believe shouldn't be.
And we go, God, do something.
And I'll be honest, we may not all be experiencing that in the same way all the time.
That's fair.
We may not experience the highs and lows in the same way.
We may be at different points and view the state of things around us in different ways.
We may think things are getting better.
We may think things are getting worse.
We may be full of hope or not, but we can all agree that wherever we are in that spectrum, things are not as they should be.
We still too frequently and too tangibly see that this is a world need of saving.
Where sin and darkness still has its day.
And it can be overwhelming.
It can be disheartening.
And the closer it, the closer it hits the home, the harder it is to navigate.
We look up to God and we say, this cannot be it.
You did not save me out of sin and death.
You did not call me out of addiction.
You did not call me out of my old life to live in this.
There has to be something better.
There has to be something different.
much like the people of Israel looking at their circumstances and wondering why they're being called to build houses and plant gardens and have kids and marry them off.
God is telling them, this is how you're going to make it through.
And we're looking at God and going, I don't want to wait to make it through.
I want to wait to make it out.
I don't want your help navigating the storm.
I want you to pull me out of the storm.
I want you to fix this, just change this now.
What we want, what we need, what we desire is freedom, is salvation, is redemption, is restoration.
But the trouble is that we understandably want it when we want it, how we want it.
And that's fear.
God is all about truth.
God constantly reminded His disciples, He reminds us about the truth.
He told them, in this world you will have trouble.
He told them, in this world they will hate you because they hated me.
He told them, the Son of Man doesn't even have a bed to sleep on, a pillow to sleep on.
He never said the life of following Him would be easy.
He said it was worth it and that He was worth it.
He's trying to, I believe,
through speaking through the prophets to Israel and then to us today.
Not this miss or ignore our struggles and our needs and our concerns, but to remind us of who he is in the midst of them.
If we look back at Jeremiah 29, we can start to see some of what God is trying to do and how we're supposed to navigate the
wants, needs, and desires, and the struggles of this life.
In verse seven, we read, also seek the peace and prosperity of the city to which I have carried you into exile.
Pray to the Lord for it, because if it prospers, you two will prosper.
So not only are we supposed to live into our circumstances and hunker down and be there, but we're supposed to start caring for the people around us.
There seems to be something intricate or something unique about God saying that the way you're gonna make it through
If I buckling down and being faithful to the things I've called you to, but by also seeking the wellbeing of those around you, even your enemies.
He says, if they prosper, you will prosper.
See, God seems to be not ignoring, but very concerned with the manner in which they navigate this time of difficulty, more so than the when they're gonna get out or whether they're getting out right away.
He's calling them and I think then calling us similarly to broaden our understanding of what it means to prosper so that it includes the prosperity of those around us.
Remember, at the end of the day, we are God's people and God's people that in Israel and us were always meant to be ambassadors of God.
A people set apart that echoed his values and his heart and his love so that the world would come to know him as God.
The New Testament tells us that we as his people will be known by our love,
There should be a blessing to those around us so that through us, people would come to see and know Jesus and turn to him.
So going back again to Jeremiah 29, we've now kind of made it back to the verses we started with.
So God has told them, this is the plan while you're in exile.
This is how you're supposed to live.
This is what being faithful to me will look like.
Ignore the false prophets.
Seek the prosperity of the city.
That's the context of what's happened.
And then let's go back to those familiar verses, adding verse 14.
So with all that as the backdrop, that's when God says, for I know the plans I have for you, declares the Lord.
Plans to prosper you, not harm you.
Plans to give you hope in a future.
Then you will call on me and come and pray to me, and I will listen to you.
You will seek me and find me when you seek me with your all your heart.
I will be found by you, declares the Lord, and will bring you back from captivity.
I will gather you from all the nations and places where I have banished you, declares the Lord, and I will bring you back to the place from which I carried you into exile.
I don't know what your Babylon is.
I don't know your circumstances.
I don't know what your deepest wants, needs and desires are.
I don't know when you look at the panorama of your life, what that outlook is or how it makes you feel.
But in the same way that God was reassuring the people of Israel, because when you read those verses in the context of the story, it's even more powerful because it is into that despair and hopelessness that God is saying those promises to reassure them.
I want to remind all of us that that same God is sovereign.
His power, authority, and justice, no, no end and no, no bounds.
His love is beyond compare.
He is the king of king.
the Lord of Lords, the Alpha Omega first and last beginning in the end.
And that God, that very same God creator of the cosmos is looking at Israel in that story and saying, I know your wants and needs and desires and I have not forgotten you.
That same God
is looking at you right now with your finances, in your marriage, in your job, in this cultural moment, with all of your needs, wants and desires, and he's saying to you the same thing, I see you, I have not forgotten you.
And he shares that promise, I know the plans I have for you.
The healing, the justice, the restoration that we want,
right now may not come how and when we want it, but it will come.
That is the assurance we have in him.
That is what he was trying to tell Israel, look, you messed up.
There's a consequence, but that doesn't mean I've forgotten you.
I haven't left you.
So while you're here, this is how I want you to honor me.
Be faithful and live in this way and trust me.
Because it is coming, the rescue is coming.
He says the same to us.
You may not get the healing or the finances or the restoration or the things you want, exactly how you want it, when you want it, but I haven't forgotten you.
It is coming.
Remain faithful to me while you wait.
In essence, it becomes a question of trust.
God is looking at Israel and saying, will you trust me and remain faithful to me even while you're
wants, needs, and desires, maybe aren't getting answered yet, and wait on me.
He's looking at us and saying, I know your wants, needs, and desires, but while you wait on those, will you live faithfully, how I've called you to live, and will you trust me?
He's given Israel, he's given us plenty of evidence that would warrant us trusting him,
But doesn't mean that it's always easy.
Friends, I have to tell you, when I prayed to God for this message, the first verse that he gave, he didn't, that where he first took me to was verse 13 of this chapter.
You will seek me and find me when you seek me with all your heart.
Oh, and that hits hard.
Do you know why it's hard?
You know why with all your heart is hard?
Because I know exactly what that looks like.
I am prone to give my heart and my all to many things.
They just usually are senseless silly things.
I can talk your ear off about soccer.
I can talk your ear off about Star Wars and Lord of the Rings and geek stuff.
It's one of the things Jim and I talk about the most.
I will move heaven and earth to make sure that my schedule allows for me to spend countless hours watching the World Cup that's coming up this summer.
or that new show, or another episode of that series, or whatever, to go on my hobbies, hiking and camping, whatever else.
I know what it's like to spend the week living for a day and a moment and focus on my energy toward it.
The hard thing is that all too often, that thing is not God.
All too often,
That thing is not time with him.
It's not seeking him.
It's not listening to him.
And it's not doing what he calls me to do.
I don't know if that sounds familiar to any of you.
And then the hard thing becomes that when my wants, my needs and my desires rise to the surface, when I look at the news, when I look at the world around me and I say the prayer, Lord, change this.
Lord, fix this.
And I turn to God to discuss it.
I find that I've wandered a bit off from God.
Not denied my faith, not turned to a false God, but I just realized I'm not close to Him because I filled the space with other pursuits, other things, other distractions.
And again, it doesn't have to be like outright downright sin, just other things.
My heart has pursued
other things more than God, and I've left Jesus to the side.
But my knees, my ones, my desires, the crisis of life, too often what happens is I'm treating God like an emergency plan.
In case of emergency, break Jesus.
Okay, Jesus, let's go.
And that's not how it works.
It doesn't work in any relationship that way.
You don't get the emergency wife, emergency healthy marriage, emergency best friend, no.
So I turn to God, my needs, my wants, my desires.
And he says, I am perfectly willing to help you navigate that, but I have to be first.
You will seek me and find me when you seek me with all your heart.
As I prayed about it,
Because again, I don't know your circumstances.
I think what God was placing in my heart, reminding me of first and then for me to share with you.
I said, the invitation for you today is simple.
Are you ready to turn to Him and seek Him with all your heart?
You know what that looks like in your life.
The Spirit is alive and well in you, and He knows what He's highlighting.
You know what that means.
Are you ready to pursue Him
First, and entrust all these needs, wants and desires to Him.
Or are you going to depend on your own self-sufficiency or on other means to address those?
Because you can't wait or trust God's timing and sovereignty.
He's there.
He's always there.
He's waiting.
waiting to forgive if you've wandered off, waiting to restore if you don't feel as close, waiting to sustain if it feels too hard, waiting to guide you if you don't know where to go.
All we have to do is take those steps toward him.
Throughout the history of God's people, the Shema has been a central piece of God's people's identity.
That is because
It gives them the framework as to how God's people should live with that as the litmus test.
The Shema found the different places but in Deuteronomy chapter six, four or five reads, here O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.
Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your strength.
If that sounds familiar,
Of course it does, it's because when Jesus was asked what the most important commandment was, out of all the hundreds of commandments, Jesus answered with the Shema, love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your strength.
And then he added, love your neighbor as yourself.
He basically says that the whole life of the kingdom of God, all the commandments, all the prophets, all rest on those two key pillars.
Love God, love others.
how interesting that in Israel's time of exile and difficulty, faithfully living for God and waiting on him, relied on them loving God and loving others by seeking the prosperity of the city.
My prayer for you and for me is that we would be a people that are willing to regularly turn to the Lord with all that we have, with all that we want and all that we need.
and allow Him to be in the throne of our hearts as we place those things at the foot of His throne, at the foot of the cross.
And guys, this is the beauty of our God.
He can handle our wants and desires.
You can go to God and go, I don't want this.
I don't like this job.
I don't like this city.
We can bring that to Him.
We can actually say, he says he's a good father.
We can tell him, this is what I would want.
But the problem is that too often that's where the conversation stops.
Hey Santa, Jesus, here's my list.
This is what I want.
I didn't say that first service, so you got that one.
But that's not what he's calling us to.
That's not how even how this works.
I know we have permission to do that with God because if Jesus did it, we can do it.
And we're told that Jesus in the garden looked up at his phone and said, if there's any way that this cup can be passed from me, could we do that?
But the next part is the part that's hard.
It's taking that want, that need, that desire.
It's taking your circumstances and all that's hard about them and taking them to God and going, I need help.
And this is how I want the help.
And this is when I want the help.
but then ultimately going, but you are God, I am not.
You conquered sin and death, I did not.
You tell me you love me and I can believe that.
You tell me you have plans for me, plans to prosper me and not harm me.
So I'll believe in that.
So therefore not my will, but yours be done.
Are we a people that are willing to very humbly and very honestly
Take our wants and desires to the throne room of God, making him first above everything else, and letting him guide us through until the things we need and desire are answered in his way, in his time.
Will we remain faithful in the waiting and trust that he is who he says he is, a good and loving God?